---
INTE: 5300
title: Exploring Media Literacy's role in Sociopolitical Development
media:
  - title:YouTube: Making the Cut, Season 2 (Trailer)
    url: https://youtu.be/wHmdfVjAYnQ
---

## Reflection

Watts, R.J., Griffith, D.M. & Abdul-Adil, J. (1999) Sociopolitical development as an antidote for oppression—theory and action. Am J Community Psychol 27,2. pp.255–271. <https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022839818873>

Watts, R., Hipolito-Delgado, C. (2015) Thinking ourselves to liberation?: Advancing sociopolitical action in critical consciousness. Urban Review. 47,5. pp.847-867. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11256-015-0341-x>

1.  **Describe your understanding of the concept of sociopolitical development. Using this definition as a guide, do you agree with the Watts' viewpoint that sociopolitical development is vital to human development and the creation of a just society? Why or why not?**

    Critical consciousness describes the process by which oppressed and socially marginalized people critically analyze their social and economic conditions and take action to improve them (Freire 1970) (Watts & Hipolito-Delgado, 2015).

    Sociopolitical development is the psychological process that leads to and supports social and political action (Watts et al., 2009).

    As mentioned in the quiz question similar to this reflection question, I have a difficult time distinguishing how sociopolitical development is a separate theory from the its base, critical consciousness theory. Is it in the framework or steps to develop critical consciousness? Searching this on the internet reveals little information other than it is an emerging theory - framework. In my search, I stumbled upon The National Equity Project (Links to an external site.). It appears to be full of research (Links to an external site.), resources (Links to an external site.) and frameworks (Links to an external site.) to challenge and raise awareness to systematic oppression. It lead me to the Instagram #liberatorydesign (Links to an external site.). I think this leads to my answer whether I agree with Watts' viewpoint.

    For the duration of my work within Adult Basic Education, I have instructed, developed, and implemented curriculum that would lead Adult learners to critical analysis of media presented to them. Most of this media would then be later tested through standardized testing. As a result, often times we would have to also instruct test taking strategies for the standardized tests. There are several reasons for this need. One that stands out, in light of this question, is that students critical analysis doesn't always align to the analysis that the standardized test is expecting. Standardized testing, in itself, is a separate discussion; but it does tie into the idea of developing critical consciousness which standardized testing may discourage.

    Moving externally, from the classroom to community, I have found discourse supports the notion that sociopolitical development is necessary. When speaking about systematic oppression it is easy to remove oneself from it impacts. Example would be talking to a person who doesn't understand that they carry privilege; they themselves are impoverished. How could they have privilege? But when building from their experience and critically looking at the affects of their environment, they may begin to see how they are viewed differently than others around them. Discussing different experiences does, in fact, reveal privilege that others do not have. In my mind, this is developing critical consciousness (sociopolitical development). Of course, this is actionable if the person who is gaining new insights is willing to release that privilege they carry or challenge the system that is supporting inequality.



2.  **With the incredible news cycle we have been experiencing in the last few months, these articles speak to the important and crucial role that media literacy plays in developing citizenship skills. How does this notion connect to the Watts' article on sociopolitical development?**

    With our current news cycles I found insight to this phenomenon from the documentary, "The Mean World Syndrome."  After viewing the documentary, I walked away with the understanding that those who take in more information from media channels begin to develop false realities based on those channels. The connection I inferred from this idea is that those who are overly consumed by medias, have less time to actually interact with those around them. Thinking back to 2020, we were in a great isolation period and to this day some are still not connected people around them. It was my thinking that this is how peoples perceptions became so divided - or rather exasperated the divide. Those that were at one time connected to those around them and community, had lost that connection. Some relied heavily on media networks to keep them in the loop - creating false media realities. Others found Social Media networks to be their new friend and joined in the trends of eating, baking, workouts, etc. To this extent, we are influenced by what we interact with - peer pressure comes to mind here.

    One thing I haven't figured out, is who's view of reality is the correct one, especially when looking through the lens of critical consciousness (sociopolitical development). There is not an agreement of what oppression is in the US at large. Citizens grapple with the complexities of where rights end and where others' rights begin. I had a colleague describing a diversity, equity, and inclusion training that first focused on LGBTQ+ inclusion, then was followed by faith inclusion. The faith based speaker felt they were no longer "safe" and "closeted" in their workplaces because of the others inclusion. The answer seems obvious to me that all people belong, but some have deep engrained points of view of what is right vs. wrong. The fact that stereotypes are still a driving narrative in media shows that we haven't moved to the point of allowing others to exists as who they are, in peace. Besides marketers forming profiles of who people are, we also have hate groups to contend with. Each placing people into boxes and perpetuating forms of oppression.

    With sociopolitical development, it is intended to engage the viewer in critical analysis of their environments. The Young Warriors program entered the study with an interesting view of rap music and the entertainment the young people engaged with. However, with media interrogation, or leading questions, the researchers were able to have the students vocalize oppression in their surroundings. But then again, this oppression was already vocalized in music and entertainment being questioned - without verifying the media used in the program, this assumption is based on my knowledge of 90s rap music. Therefore the students made it known to the researchers that the oppression in the media was in fact in their experiences and communities too. I suppose the sociopolitical questions removed the glamorization of the entertainment industry, but wouldn't this be exposing economic disparities? Like most growing up, the young people saw those who had things that were unattainable to them, unfortunately this extended beyond material things and into being stable and part of a safe community - I can relate there. But was rap music perpetuating this oppression, or other factors? Since the 90s, and earlier, we have seen a changing force within rap most notably from the hip-hop counter-culture, driving positivity back into the messaging.

    So how does all this work with our current news cycles, when what I read and see in media doesn't align to what I hear and see out my front door? When I have friends who tell me about their experiences and when I share them no one believes that the experience could be true. Is it because they aren't connected to the place of events? Or because it's not popularized in the news cycle? Or a combination of both. I see one crucial element missing in developing a critical consciousness (sociopolitical development), in that we need to first agree one what oppression is and who is being oppressed? I feel the US has many differing views on this currently. If we are to be critically looking at media and analyzing how it is perpetuating oppressive processes, don't we need to have a common idea of oppression? Or would this be informed by the collective process of sociopolitical development?
