---
INTE: 5300
title: Overview
---

## Reflection

1. **What are your interests outside of school, work, and this class?**

    Ah, the work-life balance question. I enjoy getting outside for bicycle rides - to nowhere - and spending time in the parks around me here in Denver, CO. Aside from that, I like to make media! I'm an artist and enjoy working in a variety of media. From India ink and watercolor to charcoal. I also enjoy working in three dimensions (sculpture). I've spent quality time learning web development and enjoy working in digital media as well.

2. **Tell us about yourself, family, pets, hobbies, passions.**

    I live in Denver, CO. I love cats, but currently am petless. See question 1 for hobbies and passions. But to extend this, I would also include work. I enjoy working in education, supporting others, and seeking to work for a mission-driven organization that I can get behind.

3. **Where are you in terms of your academic or education journey?**

    I began the LDT Masters program in Fall 2020. At this point, I am halfway through, and after this Summer, I am planning for Fall to be my final semester.

    How did you come to enroll in this course? This course is part of the required courses for the new Digital Pedagogy and New Literacies certificate,  Fall 2021. To keep with my anticipated graduation, I enrolled in the class, pre-update.

4. **Have you worked or are you currently in a library, school, or working in education? What grade/level?**

    In what capacity? Until August of 2020, I was working in Adult Basic Education for the last 10+ years as an Instructor, Distance Learning Coordinator, and ultimately Program Coordinator. Unfortunately, planned federal funding cuts eliminated my program during 2020. I am currently sitting president for CAEPA, Colorado's professional organization supporting Adult Education programs through advocacy, professional learning, and resource sharing.

5. **What do you feel are the "hot topics", "buzz words", or trends in education today?**

    I think diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) may be the current buzzwords gaining attention.

6. **What do you hope to gain from this course?**

    I would like to continue gaining insight into Media. Continuing from my last class in Learning with Social Media (which has now been eliminated). After this first week, I'm intrigued by the weekly media deconstructions, and then applying this to media constructions.

7. **What topics do you hope we cover? I would hope to cover some "hot topics" and "buzzwords" that we all mention.**

    What does it mean to be "media literate"? Having gained insight into this from the first-week coursework, it would mean critically thinking about media and becoming an active and aware participant in the conversation. This idea aligns well with past lessons I created and taught on Media Literacy, whereas the focus of the lesson looked very similar to that of the 5 Key Questions of Media Literacy in the Ted-Ed lesson.

8. **What does the term "media literacy" mean to you?**

    My feelings on media literacy align well with the previous question and the 5 Key Questions. I believe media literacy is acknowledging that media has a purpose, target audience, and a reason it was created. To naturally question and critically think about the intentions of media, is media literacy.
